Add Dynamic Group membership caching. (#4092)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/models/extras/dynamicgroup.md

Creating, updating, or deleting a Dynamic Group will automatically invalidate the cache for that group. This means that the next time the group is evaluated, the cache will be refreshed with the new membership information.

This greatly speeds up the reverse association of an object to the Dynamic Group(s) it is a part of.

A Dynamic Group object in the ORM exposes two (2) properties for retrieving the members of that group:

- `members` - The evaluated QuerySet defined by the Dynamic Group and it's potential child groups. This will always perform database queries.
- `members_cached` - A cached instance of the `members` property. This will only perform database queries if the cache is expired.

Additionally a method is exposed for retrieving the members of a Dynamic Group:

- `get_members()` - A way of retrieving the members of a Dynamic Group and also forcibly refreshing the cache. The arguments are:
    - `skip_cache` - A boolean value that will ignore the cache and will always return the `members` QuerySet if `True`, defaults to `False`.

>     - `force_update_cache` - A boolean value that will force the cache to be updated with the current membership of the Dynamic Group if `True`, defaults to `False`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the use cases and possible permutations of having these as two separate parameters. Especially if `.get_members(skip_cache=True)` is identical to `.members`, what purpose does it serve?

An model instance that supports Dynamic Groups will expose the following properties:

- `dynamic_groups` - Full reverse membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, performs the most database queries.
- `dynamic_groups_cached` - Full reverse membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, uses cached member list if available. Ideal for most use cases.

> - `dynamic_groups_list` - List of membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, performs one less database query than `dynamic_groups`.

Reviewer: Can you flesh this out more? It's not at all clear to me what the difference is between "Full reverse membership" and "List of membership". Maybe some concrete examples might help?

- `dynamic_groups_list_cached` - List of membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, uses cached member list if available. Performs no database queries in optimal conditions.

The model instance will also expose the following methods:

> - `get_dynamic_groups` - A way of retrieving the Dynamic Groups the instance is a member of. The arguments are:

Reviewer: When/why would I want to use `get_dynamic_groups()` instead of one of the four properties above? Seems like two ways to do the exact same thing?

    - `skip_cache` - A boolean value that will ignore the cache(s) if `True`, defaults to `False`.
    - `as_queryset` - A boolean value that will return the `dynamic_groups` QuerySet instead of the `dynamic_groups_list` list if `True`, defaults to `False`.

### Invalidating/Refreshing the Cache

> If you need to invalidate the membership cache for a Dynamic Group, you can do so by running the management command: `nautobot-server refresh_dynamic_group_member_caches`. This will invalidate the cache for all Dynamic Groups.

Reviewer: Might be useful to think about adding a "Refresh" button on the Dynamic Group detail view? I know editing and saving the group will have the same effect, but that is more clicks for the user and also results in unnecessarily creating a changelog entry.

Reviewer 2: @lampwins said last week we can add as follow-on

```json
DELETE /api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/{uuid}/
```

## Membership and Caching

> Since looking up the members of a Dynamic Group can be a very expensive operation, Nautobot caches the results of these lookups for a configurable amount of time. By default, this cache is set to one (1) hour. This means that if you make a change a member (or potential member) of a Dynamic Group, it may take up to an hour for that change to be reflected in the group's membership. You can change this default value by changing the `DYNAMIC_GROUP_CACHE_TIMEOUT` in the administration panel. This value is in seconds.

Reviewer 2: It's actually defaulted to off now per your earlier suggestion.

```json
DELETE /api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/{uuid}/
```

## Membership and Caching

> Since looking up the members of a Dynamic Group can be a very expensive operation, Nautobot caches the results of these lookups for a configurable amount of time. By default, this cache is set to one (1) hour.This means that if you make a change a member (or potential member) of a Dynamic Group, it may take up to an hour for that change to be reflected in the group's membership. You can change this default value by changing the `DYNAMIC_GROUP_CACHE_TIMEOUT` in the administration panel. This value is in seconds.

Reviewer 3: Any place the new settings are referenced in this document should also link to the forthcoming optional settings documentation for them.

```suggestion
Since looking up the members of a Dynamic Group can be a very expensive operation, Nautobot caches the results of these lookups for a configurable amount of time. By default, this cache is set to one (1) hour. This means that if you make a change a member (or potential member) of a Dynamic Group, it may take up to an hour for that change to be reflected in the group's membership. You can change this default value by changing the `DYNAMIC_GROUP_CACHE_TIMEOUT` in the administration panel. This value is in seconds.
```

Creating, updating, or deleting a Dynamic Group will automatically invalidate the cache for that group. This means that the next time the group is evaluated, the cache will be refreshed with the new membership information.

> This greatly speeds up the reverse association of an object to the Dynamic Group(s) it is a part of.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This greatly speeds up the reverse association of any object to any Dynamic Group(s) to which it may be associated.
```

A Dynamic Group object in the ORM exposes two (2) properties for retrieving the members of that group:

- `members` - The evaluated QuerySet defined by the Dynamic Group and it's potential child groups. This will always perform database queries.
- `members_cached` - A cached instance of `members.all()`. This will only perform database queries if the cache is expired. You can continue to perform `.filter()` and other QuerySet operations but this will incur additional database queries.

Additionally methods for working with group membership and caching are:

- `update_cached_members` - A way of forcing an update to the cached members of a Dynamic Group. This will always perform database queries. It will also return the updated `members_cached` property.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- `am_i_a_member` - A way of checking if an object is a member of a Dynamic Group. The arguments are:
    - `obj` - An instance of an object to check if it is a member of the given group.
    - `skip_cache` - A boolean value that will use the preferred method of checking an instances member depending if using the cached list (`obj in list`) or the uncached queryset (`members.filter(pk=obj.pk).exists()`) is desired, defaults to `False`.

> An model instance that supports Dynamic Groups will expose the following properties:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A model instance that supports Dynamic Groups will expose the following properties:
```

> - `dynamic_groups` - A QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects, performs the most database queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dynamic_groups` - A QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects; performs the most database queries.
```

    - Iterates over all Dynamic Groups that are applicable to the instance's content type, resulting in a list (what is available as `dynamic_groups_list`) of applicable Dynamic Groups.
    - A final query (`DynamicGroup.objects.filter(pk__in=dynamic_groups_list)`) is necessary to retrieve a QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects.
    - Always performs `N+1` queries where `N` is the number of Dynamic Groups that are applicable to the instance's content type

>     - Evaluation of `instance_1.dynamic_groups` add no benefit to `instance_2.dynamic_groups`: each instance will perform `N+1` queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Evaluation of `instance_1.dynamic_groups` adds no benefit to `instance_2.dynamic_groups`: each instance will perform `N+1` queries.
```

> - `dynamic_groups_cached` - A QuerySet of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, uses cached member list if available. Ideal for most use cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dynamic_groups_cached` - A QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects; uses cached member list if available. Ideal for most use cases.
```

    - Uses cached member lists for each Dynamic Group that is applicable to the instance's content type. Membership check returns a list (what is available as `dynamic_groups_list_cached`) of applicable Dynamic Groups.
    - A query (`DynamicGroup.objects.filter(pk__in=dynamic_groups_list_cached)`) is necessary to retrieve a QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects.
    - Ideal for most use cases, performing only `1` query if membership lists are cached.
    - Evaluation of `instance_1.dynamic_groups_cached` benefits `instance_2.dynamic_groups_cached` as all dynamic group membership lists are cached: `instance_1.dynamic_groups_cached` may perform `N+1` queries, but `instance_2.dynamic_groups_cached` will perform `1` query.

> - `dynamic_groups_list` - List of membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, performs one less database query than `dynamic_groups`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dynamic_groups_list` - List of membership to `DynamicGroup` objects; performs one less database query than `dynamic_groups`.
```

    - The internal list used by `dynamic_groups` to retrieve a QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects, but saves the final query.
    - Beneficial if you don't need QuerySet instance of `DynamicGroup` objects, but want to use uncached membership lists on a large amount of objects.
    - Always performs `N` queries where `N` is the number of Dynamic Groups that are applicable to the instance's content type

> - `dynamic_groups_list_cached` - List of membership of instance to `DynamicGroup` objects, uses cached member list if available. Performs no database queries in optimal conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dynamic_groups_list_cached` - List of membership to `DynamicGroup` objects; uses cached member list if available. Performs no database queries in optimal conditions.
```

    - The internal list used by `dynamic_groups_cached` to retrieve a QuerySet of `DynamicGroup` objects, but saves the final query.
    - The most optimal way to retrieve a list of `DynamicGroup` objects for an instance: Worst case `instance_1.dynamic_groups_list_cached` will perform `N` queries, but `instance_2.dynamic_groups_list_cached` will perform `0` queries.

### Invalidating/Refreshing the Cache

If you need to invalidate the membership cache for a Dynamic Group, you can do so by running the management command: `nautobot-server refresh_dynamic_group_member_caches`. This will invalidate the cache for all Dynamic Groups.

You can also create a `Job` to run periodically to refresh the cache for particular Dynamic Groups and running on a schedule:

```python
from nautobot.extras.jobs import Job, ObjectVar
from nautobot.extras.models import DynamicGroup

class ExampleDynamicGroupMemberCacheRefresh(Job):
    dynamic_group = ObjectVar(
        model=DynamicGroup
    )

    class Meta:
        name = "Update Dynamic Group Member Cache"

    def run(self, data, commit):
        DynamicGroup.objects.get(pk=data['dynamic_group']).update_cached_members()

> ```

Reviewer 3: We might consider publishing this as a system job in keeping with Glenn's suggestion about having a "refresh" button. Perhaps that could be a Job Button? Just spitballing here.

Reviewer 2: We don't have system jobs in 1.6 AFAIK.

Reviewer 3: @bryanculver Riiiight. 🧠
